Write first version of the "Testing contracts" guide (#2831)
NomicFoundation/hardhat: docs/src/content/hardhat-runner/docs/guides/test-contracts.md

# Testing contracts

> After [compiling your contracts](./compile-contracts.md), the next step is to write some tests to verify that they work as intended. This guide explains our recommended approach for testing contracts in Hardhat. It relies on [ethers](https://docs.ethers.io/v5/) to connect to the Hardhat Network and [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/) and [Chai](https://www.chaijs.com/) to write the tests. It also uses our custom [Chai matchers](/hardhat-chai-matchers) and our [Hardhat Network Helpers](/hardhat-network-helpers) to make it easier to write contracts-related tests.

Reviewer: Maybe mention that they come installed with hardhat toolbox, and you would have them if you followed the other guides

Author: Added a sentence in ec8735dfe79fedc6173deec80d7ea28517b4a382

While this is the way we recommend, Hardhat is flexible and you can customize the approach or take a completely different path with other tools.

### Initial setup

In this guide we’ll write some tests for the sample project so, if you haven’t done it yet, go and [initialize it](./project-setup.md).

We also recommend you use [TypeScript](./typescript.md) to get better autocompletion and catch possible errors earlier. This guide will assume you are using TypeScript, but you can click the tabs of the snippets to switch their language.

> The setup includes some example tests in the `test/Lock.ts` file, but ignore them for now. Instead, create a `test/my-tests.ts` file directory and run only those. For example, if your test file is called `test/my-tests.ts`, you can run only that file with `npx hardhat test test/my-tests.ts`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The setup includes some example tests in the `test/Lock.ts` file, but ignore them for now. Instead, create a `test/my-tests.ts` file. During this guide we'll only run those, by running `npx hardhat test test/my-tests.ts`, instead of just `npx hardhat test`.
```

### A simple test

> For our first test we’ll deploy the `Lock` contract and assert that the unlock time returned by the `unlockTime()` getter is the same one that we passed in the constructor:

Reviewer: > The sample project comes with a Lock contract. We'll write tests for it. If you haven't read it yet, please take a look at `contract/Lock.sol`.

Reviewer: Sorry for not being clear. Adding something like that at the beginning

Author: Makes sense, added in 61e9fba2002e8ee38626fc4634accef6ec424c9a

```tsx
import { expect } = from "chai";
import hre from "hardhat";
import helpers from "hardhat-network-helpers";

describe("Lock", function () {
  it("Should set the right unlockTime", async function () {
    const lockedAmount = 1_000_000_000;
    const ONE_YEAR_IN_SECS = 365 * 24 * 60 * 60;
    const unlockTime = (await helpers.time.latest()) + ONE_YEAR_IN_SECS;

    // deploy a lock contract where funds can be withdrawn
    // one year in the future
    const Lock = await ethers.getContractFactory("Lock");
    const lock = await Lock.deploy(unlockTime, { value: lockedAmount });

    // assert that the value is correct
    expect(await lock.unlockTime()).to.equal(unlockTime);
  });
});
```

> The first thing we do is to import the functions we are going to use: the [`expect`](https://www.chaijs.com/api/bdd/) function from `chai` to write our assertions, the [Hardhat Runtime Environment](../advanced/hardhat-runtime-environment.md), and the [network helpers](/hardhat-network-helpers) to interact with the Hardhat Network. After that we use the `describe` and `it` functions, which are global Mocha's functions used to describe and group your tests (you can read more about Mocha [here](https://mochajs.org/#getting-started)).

Author: I don't like the repetition of "thing/things". What about "First we'll import the things we are going to use:"

> The first thing we do is to import the functions we are going to use: the [`expect`](https://www.chaijs.com/api/bdd/) function from `chai` to write our assertions, the [Hardhat Runtime Environment](../advanced/hardhat-runtime-environment.md), and the [network helpers](/hardhat-network-helpers) to interact with the Hardhat Network. After that we use the `describe` and `it` functions, which are global Mocha's functions used to describe and group your tests (you can read more about Mocha [here](https://mochajs.org/#getting-started)).

Author: 0ac79e3cc18f65533557e0dd0d1116079dd07aaf

> The test itself is what’s inside the `it` function. First we set the values for the amount we want to lock (in [wei](https://ethereum.org/en/glossary/#wei)) and the unlock time. For the latter we use [`time.latest`](</hardhat-network-helpers/docs/reference#latest()>), a network helper that returns the timestamp of the last mined block. Then we deploy the contract itself: first we get a [`ContractFactory`](https://docs.ethers.io/v5/single-page/#/v5/api/contract/contract-factory/) for the `Lock` contract and then we deploy it, passing the unlock time as its only constructor argument.

Reviewer: We also pass it a value

Author: 0f82fdf3a0a9c51f3faa54ebba1a3afef4ebb04f

Reviewer: I'd be more explicit. Something like "We also pass it an object with transaction (not constructor) parameters. This is optional, but will use it to send some ETH by setting its `value` field."

Author: Added something like that in 834aa5eac25661b1d40caf699e2442e7aef31978

Notice that in the previous test we wrote `expect(await ...)` but now we are doing `await expect(...)`. In the first case we were comparing two values in a synchronous way; the inner await is just there to wait for the value to be retrieved. In the second case, the whole assertion is async, because it has to wait until the transaction is mined. This means that the `expect` call returns a promise that we have to wait.

### Manipulating the time of the network

We are deploying our `Lock` contract with an unlock time of one year. If we want to write a test that checks what happens after the unlock time has passed, we can’t wait that amount of time. We could use a shorter amount, like 5 seconds, but that’s a less realistic value and it's still a long time to wait in a test.

The solution is to simulate the passage of time. This can be done with the [`time.increaseTo`](</hardhat-network-helpers/docs/reference#increaseto(timestamp)>) network helper:

```tsx
it("Should transfer the funds to the owner", async function () {
  // ...deploy the contract...

  await time.increaseTo(unlockTime);

  // this will throw if the transaction reverts
  await lock.withdraw();
});
```

> The `time.increaseTo` helper mines a new block with the given timestamp. After doing that, we can call the `withdraw` function again. In ethers, if a function reverts, the method will return a rejected promise. Awaiting the result then means that the test will fail if the function reverts.

Reviewer: > In ethers, if a function reverts, the method will return a rejected promise. Awaiting the result then means that the test will fail if the function reverts.

This is a bit confusing.

What about something like:

As we mentioned, calling `lock.withdraw()` returns a `Promise`. If the transaction fails, the promise will be rejected. Using `await` will throw in that case, so the test will fail.

Author: See 1f4ede524fbd3aebc3a68c706b38b2ad89efdb65

    return { lock, unlockTime, lockedAmount };
  }

  it("Should set the right unlockTime", async function () {
    const { lock, unlockTime } = await loadFixture(deployOneYearLockFixture);

    // assert that the value is correct
    expect(await lock.unlockTime()).to.equal(unlockTime);
  });

  it("Should revert with the right error if called too soon", async function () {
    const { lock } = await loadFixture(deployOneYearLockFixture);

    await expect(lock.withdraw()).to.be.revertedWith("You can't withdraw yet");
  });
});
```

The fixture function can return anything you want, and the `loadFixture` helper will return it. We recommend returning an object like we did here, so you can extract only the values you care about for that test.

### Other tests

There are several other things you can test, like [which events are emitted](/hardhat-chai-matchers/docs/reference#.emit) or [how the balances of the involved addresses change](/hardhat-chai-matchers/docs/reference#balance-change). Check the `test/Lock.js` file to see the other examples.

### Running tests in parallel

You can run your tests in parallel by using the `--parallel` flag:

```
npx hardhat test --parallel
```

> Alternatively, use `parallel: true` in the `mocha` section of your Hardhat config, which will enable parallelism for plugins that don't have a `--parallel` flag, like `solidity-coverage`.

Reviewer: I think this paragraph creates more confusion than anything else.

Author: What about just removing everything after "which will enable..."?

Author: I'm ok with just deleting the whole paragraph though.

Reviewer: > What about removing everything after "which will enable..."?

Yeah, that works

# Testing contracts

After [compiling your contracts](./compile-contracts.md), the next step is to write some tests to verify that they work as intended. This guide explains our recommended approach for testing contracts in Hardhat. It relies on [ethers](https://docs.ethers.io/v5/) to connect to the Hardhat Network and [Mocha](https://mochajs.org/) and [Chai](https://www.chaijs.com/) to write the tests. It also uses our custom [Chai matchers](/hardhat-chai-matchers) and our [Hardhat Network Helpers](/hardhat-network-helpers) to make it easier to write contracts-related tests. These packages are part of the Hardhat Toolbox plugin and, if you followed the previous guides, you should already have them installed.

While this is the way we recommend, Hardhat is flexible and you can customize the approach or take a completely different path with other tools.

### Initial setup

In this guide we’ll write some tests for the sample project so, if you haven’t done it yet, go and [initialize it](./project-setup.md).

> We also recommend you use [TypeScript](./typescript.md) to get better autocompletion and catch possible errors earlier. This guide will assume you are using TypeScript, but you can click the tabs of the snippets to switch their language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also recommend you [use TypeScript](./typescript.md) to get better autocompletion and catch possible errors earlier. This guide will assume you are using TypeScript, but you can click the tabs of the snippets to switch their language.
```

### A simple test

In the following sections we'll write some tests for the `Lock` contract that comes with the sample project. If you haven't read it yet, please take a look at the `contracts/Lock.sol` file.

For our first test we’ll deploy the `Lock` contract and assert that the unlock time returned by the `unlockTime()` getter is the same one that we passed in the constructor:

```tsx
import { expect } = from "chai";
import hre from "hardhat";
import helpers from "hardhat-network-helpers";

describe("Lock", function () {
  it("Should set the right unlockTime", async function () {
    const lockedAmount = 1_000_000_000;
    const ONE_YEAR_IN_SECS = 365 * 24 * 60 * 60;
    const unlockTime = (await helpers.time.latest()) + ONE_YEAR_IN_SECS;

    // deploy a lock contract where funds can be withdrawn
    // one year in the future
    const Lock = await ethers.getContractFactory("Lock");
    const lock = await Lock.deploy(unlockTime, { value: lockedAmount });

    // assert that the value is correct
    expect(await lock.unlockTime()).to.equal(unlockTime);
  });
});
```

> First we'll import the things we are going to use: the [`expect`](https://www.chaijs.com/api/bdd/) function from `chai` to write our assertions, the [Hardhat Runtime Environment](../advanced/hardhat-runtime-environment.md), and the [network helpers](/hardhat-network-helpers) to interact with the Hardhat Network. After that we use the `describe` and `it` functions, which are global Mocha's functions used to describe and group your tests (you can read more about Mocha [here](https://mochajs.org/#getting-started)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First we import the things we are going to use: the [`expect`](https://www.chaijs.com/api/bdd/) function from `chai` to write our assertions, the [Hardhat Runtime Environment](../advanced/hardhat-runtime-environment.md) (`hre`), and the [network helpers](/hardhat-network-helpers) to interact with the Hardhat Network. After that we use the `describe` and `it` functions, which are global Mocha functions used to describe and group your tests. (You can read more about Mocha [here](https://mochajs.org/#getting-started).)
```

> The test itself is what’s inside the `it` function. First we set the values for the amount we want to lock (in [wei](https://ethereum.org/en/glossary/#wei)) and the unlock time. For the latter we use [`time.latest`](</hardhat-network-helpers/docs/reference#latest()>), a network helper that returns the timestamp of the last mined block. Then we deploy the contract itself: first we get a [`ContractFactory`](https://docs.ethers.io/v5/single-page/#/v5/api/contract/contract-factory/) for the `Lock` contract and then we deploy it, passing the unlock time as its constructor argument. We also pass an object with the transaction parameters. This is optional, but we'll use it to send some ETH by setting its `value` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The test itself is what’s inside the callback argument to the `it` function. First we set the values for the amount we want to lock (in [wei](https://ethereum.org/en/glossary/#wei)) and the unlock time. For the latter we use [`time.latest`](</hardhat-network-helpers/docs/reference#latest()>), a network helper that returns the timestamp of the last mined block. Then we deploy the contract itself: first we get a [`ContractFactory`](https://docs.ethers.io/v5/single-page/#/v5/api/contract/contract-factory/) for the `Lock` contract and then we deploy it, passing the unlock time as its constructor argument. We also pass an object with the transaction parameters. This is optional, but we'll use it to send some ETH by setting its `value` field.
```

> Finally, we check that the value returned by the `unlockTime()` getter in the contract matches the value that we used when we deployed it. Since all the functions in a contract are async, we have to use the `await` keyword to get its value, otherwise we would be comparing a promise with a number and this would always fail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, we check that the value returned by the `unlockTime()` [getter](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.13/contracts.html#getter-functions) in the contract matches the value that we used when we deployed it. Since all the functions on a contract are async, we have to use the `await` keyword to get its value; otherwise, we would be comparing a promise with a number and this would always fail.
```

### Testing a function that reverts

In the previous test we checked that a getter function returned the correct value. This was a read-only function that can be called without paying a fee and without any risk. Other functions, however, can modify the state of the contract, like the `withdraw` function in the `Lock` contract. This means that we want some pre-conditions to be met for this function to be called successfully. If you look at its first lines you’ll see a couple of `require` checks for that purpose:

```solidity
function withdraw() public {
  require(block.timestamp >= unlockTime, "You can't withdraw yet");
  require(msg.sender == owner, "You aren't the owner");
```

The first statement checks that the unlock time has been reached, and the second one checks that the address calling the contract is its owner. Let’s start by writing a test for the first pre-condition:

```tsx
it("Should revert with the right error if called too soon", async function () {
  // ...deploy the contract as before...

  await expect(lock.withdraw()).to.be.revertedWith("You can't withdraw yet");
});
```

> In the previous test we used `.to.equal`, which is part of Chai and it’s used to compare two values, but here we are using [`.to.be.revertedWith`](/hardhat-chai-matchers/docs/reference#.revertedwith). This matcher asserts that a transaction reverts, and that the reason string of the revert is equal to a given string. The `.to.be.revertedWith` matcher is not part of Chai itself; instead, it’s added by the [Hardhat Chai Matchers](/hardhat-chai-matchers) plugin, which is included in the sample project we are using.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the previous test we used `.to.equal`, which is part of Chai and is used to compare two values. Here we are using [`.to.be.revertedWith`](/hardhat-chai-matchers/docs/reference#.revertedwith), which asserts that a transaction reverts, and that the reason string of the revert is equal to the given string. The `.to.be.revertedWith` matcher is not part of Chai itself; instead, it’s added by the [Hardhat Chai Matchers](/hardhat-chai-matchers) plugin, which is included in the sample project we are using.
```

> Notice that in the previous test we wrote `expect(await ...)` but now we are doing `await expect(...)`. In the first case we were comparing two values in a synchronous way; the inner await is just there to wait for the value to be retrieved. In the second case, the whole assertion is async, because it has to wait until the transaction is mined. This means that the `expect` call returns a promise that we have to wait.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice that in the previous test we wrote `expect(await ...)` but now we are doing `await expect(...)`. In the first case we were comparing two values in a synchronous way; the inner await is just there to wait for the value to be retrieved. In the second case, the whole assertion is async because it has to wait until the transaction is mined. This means that the `expect` call returns a promise that we have to await.
```

### Manipulating the time of the network

> We are deploying our `Lock` contract with an unlock time of one year. If we want to write a test that checks what happens after the unlock time has passed, we can’t wait that amount of time. We could use a shorter amount, like 5 seconds, but that’s a less realistic value and it's still a long time to wait in a test.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are deploying our `Lock` contract with an unlock time of one year. If we want to write a test that checks what happens after the unlock time has passed, we can’t wait that amount of time. We could use a shorter unlock time, like 5 seconds, but that’s a less realistic value and it's still a long time to wait in a test.
```

The solution is to simulate the passage of time. This can be done with the [`time.increaseTo`](</hardhat-network-helpers/docs/reference#increaseto(timestamp)>) network helper, which mines a new block with the given timestamp:

```tsx
it("Should transfer the funds to the owner", async function () {
  // ...deploy the contract...

  await time.increaseTo(unlockTime);

  // this will throw if the transaction reverts

>   await lock.withdraw();

Reviewer 2: how about using `expect(...).not.to.be.reverted` here?

Author: I'm not sure, I think I personally would use this simpler approach. `.not.to.be.reverted` might give you a more specific error message, but if a tx fails it's easy to figure out what happened. More importantly, you won't get a proper stack trace  if you use the matcher (at least until we get that fixed).

});
```

> As we mentioned, calling `lock.widthdraw()` returns a Promise. If the transaction fails, the promise will be rejected. Using `await` will throw in that case, so the test will fail if the transaction reverts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we mentioned, calling `lock.withdraw()` returns a Promise. If the transaction fails, the promise will be rejected. Using `await` will throw in that case, so the test will fail if the transaction reverts.
```

### Using a different address

> The second check done by the `withdraw` function is that the function was called by the owner of the contract. In these tests, all the deployments and function calls are done by default with the first [configured account](/hardhat-network/docs/reference.md#accounts). If we want to check that only the owner can call some function, we need to use a different account and verify that it fails.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second check done by the `withdraw` function is that the function was called by the owner of the contract. By default, deployments and function calls are done with the first [configured account](/hardhat-network/docs/reference.md#accounts). If we want to check that only the owner can call some function, we need to use a different account and verify that it fails.
```

> The `ethers.getSigners()` returns an array with all the configured accounts. We can then use the `.connect` method of the contract to call the function with a different account and check that the transaction reverts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `ethers.getSigners()` returns an array with all the configured accounts. We can use the `.connect` method of the contract to call the function with a different account and check that the transaction reverts:
```

```tsx
it("Should revert with the right error if called from another account", async function () {
  // ...deploy the contract...

  const [owner, otherAccount] = await ethers.getSigners();

  // we increase the time of the chain to pass the first check
  await time.increaseTo(unlockTime);

  // We use lock.connect() to send a transaction from another account
  await expect(lock.connect(otherAccount).withdraw()).to.be.revertedWith(
    "You aren't the owner"
  );
});
```

Here again we are calling a function and asserting that it reverts with the correct reason string. The difference is that we are using `.connect(anotherAccount)` to call the method from a different address.

### Using fixtures

So far we've deployed the `Lock` contract in each test. This means that at the beginning of each test we have to get the contract factory and then deploy the contract. This might be fine for a single contract but, if you have a more complicated setup, each test will have several lines at the begginning just to set up the desired state, and most of the time these lines will be the same.

> In Mocha, this duplication of code is handled with a `beforeEach` hook:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a typical Mocha test, this duplication of code is handled with a `beforeEach` hook:
```

```tsx
let lock;
let unlockTime;
let lockedAmount = 1_000_000_000;

> beforeEach(async function () {

Reviewer 2: just for complete accuracy, shouldn't there be a `describe` block here that contains both the `beforeEach` and the `it`?

Author: Done in 80c22a60f51e341f8a39613a180ceadad892fe20, thanks

  const ONE_YEAR_IN_SECS = 365 * 24 * 60 * 60;
  unlockTime = (await helpers.time.latest()) + ONE_YEAR_IN_SECS;

  const Lock = await ethers.getContractFactory("Lock");
  lock = await Lock.deploy(unlockTime, { value: lockedAmount });
});

it("some test", async function () {
  // use the deployed contract
});
```

> There are two problems with this approach:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, there are two problems with this approach:
```

    // assert that the value is correct
    expect(await lock.unlockTime()).to.equal(unlockTime);
  });

  it("Should revert with the right error if called too soon", async function () {
    const { lock } = await loadFixture(deployOneYearLockFixture);

    await expect(lock.withdraw()).to.be.revertedWith("You can't withdraw yet");
  });
});
```

The fixture function can return anything you want, and the `loadFixture` helper will return it. We recommend returning an object like we did here, so you can extract only the values you care about for that test.

### Other tests

There are several other things you can test, like [which events are emitted](/hardhat-chai-matchers/docs/reference#.emit) or [how the balances of the involved addresses change](/hardhat-chai-matchers/docs/reference#balance-change). Check the `test/Lock.js` file to see the other examples.

### Measuring code coverage

The Hardhat Toolbox includes the [`solidity-coverage`](https://github.com/sc-forks/solidity-coverage) plugin to measure the test coverage in your project. Just run the `coverage` task and you'll get a report:

```
npx hardhat coverage
```

### Using the gas reporter

> The Hardhat Toolbox includes the [`hardhat-gas-reporter`](https://github.com/cgewecke/hardhat-gas-reporter) plugin to get metrics of how much gas is used, based in the execution of your tests. The gas reporter is run when the `test` task is executed and the `REPORT_GAS` environment variable is set:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Hardhat Toolbox also includes the [`hardhat-gas-reporter`](https://github.com/cgewecke/hardhat-gas-reporter) plugin to get metrics of how much gas is used, based on the execution of your tests. The gas reporter is run when the `test` task is executed and the `REPORT_GAS` environment variable is set:
```
